# Accidental Discrimination
## How society excludes people with disabilities and what you can do about it

Most of the discrimination faced by people with disabilities on a day-to-day
basis is not coming from true ableists. Unfortunately, the majority of
discrimination against people with disabilities comes from people like me and you.

Below is a list of eight common kinds of accidental discrimination, and what you
as an individual can do about them:

### 1) Trying to <q>fix</q> someone

Have you ever noticed how people with disabilities are constantly bombarded with
suggestions on how they can fix themselves? If you haven't noticed, they
definitely have.

The next time you encounter someone with a disability, refrain from offering
them advice about it. Instead, get to know them, and don't make assumptions
about what they want when it comes to their disability.

### 2) Offering someone pity

People with disabilities are well aware of their impairments and the effect that
they have on their lives. No matter how nice you are trying to be, if you offer
a person with a disability your pity, all you are doing is reminding them that
not only are you focusing in on their disability, but you view it as a bad thing.

Most people won't call you out for this, but it still is likely to have the
exact opposite effect of what you intended, so just avoid it.

### 3) Assuming someone can't do something

Odds are, people with disabilities are fully aware of what they are and are not
capable of. If someone doesn't ask you for help with something, assuming they
need help because they have a disability is not a good idea.

It comes across as patronizing, no matter how you meant it.

### 4) Discounting invisible disabilities

Don't assume someone doesn't have a disability just because they
<q>don't look disabled.</q> Many disabilities are invisible and intangible from
the outside. Don't treat someone as lazy or incompetent if they need to do
things differently than you would.

Allow room for people's differences, and if you are ever unsure, always ask.

### 5) Treating someone differently because of their disability

People with disabilities are normal people, plain and simple. If you find
yourself thinking less of a person because they have a disability, you are
almost always the problem.

Approach an interaction with a person who has a disability exactly the same as
you would approach anyone else. If you don't think you can do that, perhaps it's
time to rethink how you approach people in general.

### 6) Acting before asking

Assuming that someone needs something or that they feel a certain way is asking
for trouble. If you are unsure what someone needs, ask them.

You do not know what they need better than they do, and making that assumption
is rude to them as a person. You are not going to offend someone by asking if
there's anything they need.

### 7) Designing things with only <q>normal</q> people in mind

If you don't keep diversity in mind when you design something, it is all but
guaranteed to lack accessibility. Many times, all the tools to make something
fully accessible already exist, but people never give them a second thought. As
an example, try navigating your favorite website with a screen reader.

The results of design lacking in diversity can be seen all too commonly across
the world today. Stairs without elevators, badly maintained or missing
sidewalks, and color-based indicators with no symbolic element are all examples
of common designs and choices that could have been made accessible but weren't.

So, the next time you design something, give a thought to the people who may
need to access it in a different way than you. You won't believe how big of a
difference that makes

### 8) Using offensive terminology

Many people use offensive words or phrases on the daily, without ever realizing
that what they are saying is degrading to people with disabilities.

A few of the most common ones include:

**Handicapped**: This word is widely recognized outside of the United States as
a slur, and yet it is used even in professional settings within the US. The word
essentially implies that someone who is <q>handicapped</q> is of lesser value as
a human than someone who is not. *Never use this word!*

**I'm so OCD**: This one is a bit more subtle, but harmful nonetheless.
OCD is a very real disability that affects around 1.2% of adults in the US.<cite>[1]</cite>
Using it as a joking phrase to refer to yourself or someone else as obsessive
about something can be invalidating to people who actually struggle with OCD.
*Avoid using this phrase.*

**X suffers from [disability]:** This phrase makes the assumption that the
person with the disability is suffering. They may well view their disability in
a neutral or even positive light, and language like this invalidates those
experiences. *Avoid saying this about a person with a disability.*

**You're so inspirational:** While it may seem well-meaning, saying something
like this to a person with a disability who is doing well implies that they are
inherently limited to the point where they are an inspiration for being even
close to <q>normal.</q> It's not hard to see how this could be taken as
offensive. *Do not say this to a person with a disability.*

### Conclusion

None of what was listed above are things that most people do intentionally.
Nevertheless, they all are forms of discrimination, making life needlessly
difficult for and potentially disabling people with impairments.

The most crucial thing you can do as an ally is to consciously prevent these
forms of discrimination from happening in your own life and the lives of people
around you.

These actions may be small, but they make a monumental difference.

---

### Sources

[1] [Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder [National Institute of Mental Health]](https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/obsessive-compulsive-disorder-ocd)
