# Disability in Everyday Life
## Small ways that you can make a big difference

Want to become an ally but don't know where to start? Follow these tips to make
a difference in the everyday lives of those around you:

### 1) Reassess your understanding of disability

Before you can make a difference for the better, you need to make sure that you
are not falling for any of the common disability stereotypes.

One of the most common stereotypes associated with disability is that people
with disabilities are dependent on non-disabled people caring for them in order
to live their lives. While this can be true for certain severe disabilities, it
is not true for the majority of them, and is in fact a highly offensive
stereotype.

This is because it strips people who have disabilities of their social worth and
reduces them to less-than-human in the eyes of the public. Additionally, it
invalidates any of the ways that they have been able to adapt and live, calling
them incapable even if they are fully capable.

Another common stereotype is that disabilities are always visible. In fact, the
opposite is closer to the truth. According to Forbes, 96% of all severe
disabilities in the United States are invisible.<cite>[1]</cite> Thus,
dismissing invisible disabilities invalidates the experiences of over 90% of all
people with disabilities.

Lastly, if you are unsure about someone's disability, *ask them directly.* Don't
try to disguise the question or beat around the bush, as you will just come
across as patronizing if you do. This option is *always* better than falling
back to a stereotype and assuming things about someone.

### 2) Talk about it

Nobody ever learned about something by treating it as taboo. If you truly want
to learn about disability, you will be hard pressed to find someone who won't
open up about their experiences with you.

Furthermore, talking about it brings the topic into the light and invites other
people to learn alongside you. The last thing anyone who wants to make change is
looking for is a social taboo around the area they are making change in.

So be open, be honest, and be willing to learn. The results may surprise you.

### 3) Embrace diversity and promote equity

No matter where you are, strive to embrace diversity and challenge the barriers
put in place by what society calls normal. Nothing is more powerful for change
than keeping an open mind.

Find ways that you can include and support people who are different from you,
whether that be a disability or something different entirely. Never act based on
stereotypes and first impressions.

Furthermore, strive to create an even playing field for all people. In any way
you can, make the things you create or participate in welcoming and accessible.

If you live that kind of life, you will make lasting impressions on those around
you, drawing them to join you in the push for change.

### 4) Actively fight discrimination

If you see someone acting discriminatory towards a person with a disability, get
involved. Don't let discrimination become commonplace. Make it clear that you
will not tolerate that kind of treatment of others.

Additionally, ensure that you are not acting in a discriminatory manner. It is
easy to discriminate accidentally if you are unaware. For tips on how to avoid
discrimination, see [Accidental Discrimination](#accidental-discrimination).

### Conclusion

Above are just a few of the many ways you can help improve the world for people
with disabilities, no matter who you are. Most important, however, is to keep
learning, keep growing, and keep trying to understand.

If you do that, you will be making change in no time.

---

### Sources

[1] [Invisible Disabilities: Break Down The Barriers [Forbes]](https://www.forbes.com/sites/paulamorgan/2020/03/20/invisible-disabilities-break-down-the-barriers/)
