# Models of Disability
## How your view towards disability affects what you can do about it 

Throughout the years, disability has always been a matter of major concern.
Our approach to it, however, has been anything but consistent.

For most of our history, humans have approached disability in a very degrading
way. We have ostracized people with disabilities, and often their families too,
from society, forcing them to fend for themselves with little to no help,
accommodation, or attempt for inclusion.

This was spurred by the idea that people with disabilities were unfit or unable
to be functional members of society. If you go far enough back in history, this
sentiment may have been true. It is not anymore.

Unfortunately, this idea has not gone away. Rather, our approach to it has
simply changed. Rather than leaving people with disabilities to die or simply
ignoring them, we now do everything in our power to fix them. This is more true
in modern society than ever before.

This approach to disability, wherein the person with a disability needs to be
<q>fixed,</q> is known as the Medical Model, and at first it seems like the
obvious right answer. After all, if there is something demonstrably wrong with
their bodies, shouldn't we try to fix it? Under further scrutiny, however, this
approach is quickly revealed to be nearly as harmful, if not more so, than doing
nothing at all.

Here's why:

### We cannot fix every disability

In fact, we can't even fix most of them. A disability is almost always something
that medicine or a simple procedure can't fix. In cases where this is true,
continuing to try and fix the impairment has no tangible benefit, instead
significantly reducing the quality of life of the person affected.

In a society like we have today, people who we think we can fix are often
treated very poorly, with the excuse being that they will be better off in the
long run, when the truth is that they rarely ever are. Thus, it may be a better
idea to seek alternatives to fixing the underlying impairment.

### Many disabilities can be adapted to

Take blindness, for example. Most people are terrified by the idea of going
blind, so naturally, we want to try and fix people who are. Blind people, on the
other hand, are capable of adapting remarkably well to their impairment, going
so far as to hike the entire Appalachian Trail with a guide dog<cite>[1]</cite>
or bike through busy traffic using echolocation.<cite>[2]</cite>

These are just a couple examples of the many ways people with a wide variety of
disabilities can adapt to their impairments. But then the question arises, if a
person has adapted to their disability, does trying to fix them help them? Or
does it harm them? 

### It promotes a negative self image

How would you feel about yourself if everyone around you, even professionals,
spent their time with you trying to fix you? If everyone refused to accept you
and instead tried everything to change you to be more like them? It definitely
wouldn't do anything good for your self image.

Why then do we have no problem with doing exactly that to people with
disabilities? The very model that claims to want to help people who have
disabilities blames them for their faults and rejects them unless they consent
to the long and mentally damaging process of being <q>fixed.</q>

### It justifies discrimination

The Medical Model's greatest failing is its total shift of blame for disability
onto the bodies of those affected by it. By claiming that every person who has a
disability must be fixed and made <q>normal,</q> it opens up the floodgates for
discrimination. It then goes on to absolve society of all blame for that
discrimination, because it cruelly frames the person with a disability as
somehow deserving of it.

This model is the foundation of the idea that people with disabilities are
broken, which in turn is the foundation of the ideas that they are stupid,
useless, needy, dependent, unfit for society, and a whole host of other things
that should never be said of any person.

Most, if not all, of the discrimination that people with disabilities face in
the modern age can be traced back, in one form or another, to the Medical Model.

### It reinforces the belief that disability means inability

It is a prevailing belief in modern society that disability means that you are
weak, needy, and dependent on others. This idea is extremely offensive, and
except in the case of the most severe of disabilities, it couldn't be further
from the truth.

The Medical Model attempts to fix people with disabilities in the hope that by
doing so, it can allow them to reintegrate into society and participate in all
the things they otherwise couldn't. However, because of the model's focus on the
person with a disability as in need of fixing, it itself perpetuates society's
continued lack of accommodation and accessibility for those who are otherwise
fully able to participate.

By promoting the idea that a person needs to be fixed before they can be a
functional member of society, the model, despite its benign intentions, does
little to help people with disabilities, and a whole lot to hurt them. Clearly
something else is needed.

### The Social Model

The Social Model is a relatively recent idea within scholarly circles&mdash;one
that is only beginning to find its way into mainstream culture. This model
opposes the narrative of the Medical Model by separating the ideas of impairment
and disability.

Within the model, impairments are defined as an atypical body state such as a
missing limb or non-functional eyes, whereas disability is defined a restriction
of ability imposed on the impaired person by a non-accepting society.<cite>[3]</cite>

This distinction provides several key benefits over the Medical Model:

### Empowerment of people with disabilities

Separating the negative stigma of disability from the state of being that is
impairment empowers people with disabilities to re-evaluate what it means for
them to be disabled, shining a light on a world that simply accepts them as they
are.

It allows for the view that disability doesn't need to be a bad thing, but
instead can be just another form of diversity in a truly accepting society. In
other words, it stops blaming people with disabilities for the way they are and
allows them the ability to accept and even celebrate their differences.

### Condemnation of discrimination

Just from the name alone, it is clear that the Social Model focuses a lot more
on the role society plays in disability than the Medical Model does. This model
calls into question the legitimacy of a society that ostracizes people who have
disabilities, asking the simple question: Why?

It proposes instead that the very reason disability is a bad thing is because
society has made it that way. Thus, it places the reigns of change-making into
the hands of each member of society individually, instead of expecting the
person with a disability to make a path for themselves in a world that actively
rejects them.

It holds society accountable for the discrimination they show towards people
with disabilities, and challenges them to re-evaluate the role they play in
keeping people with impairments disabled.

### Celebration of diversity

Furthermore, the Social Model opens the way for diversity to become a foundation
of society. It leans into the idea that society is fully capable of
accommodating, accepting, and celebrating the diverse nature of the human race,
and it rejects the idea of objective normalcy.

Under this model, there is no valid reason to discriminate against a person with
a disability, because it fundamentally treats them with the same respect
afforded to a person who does not have a disability. Clearly, this model is
vastly better for those who seek to truly help people who have disabilities.

### Conclusion

The prevailing model for disability, the Medical Model, presents some *serious*
flaws, leading to widespread discrimination and the degradation of disabled
people's quality of life.

The alternative, the Social Model, fixes many of these flaws, instead providing
a viewpoint where the diversity offered by various impairments is a positive for
society as a whole.

Both of these models have their merit in different circumstances, but as a
society that already tries everything to fix even the smallest deviation from
normalcy, the Social Model is the clear choice for those wishing to promote the
betterment of people with disabilities across the globe.

---

### Sources

[1] [Hiking Pioneers: Bill Irwin and His Journey on the Appalachian Trail [Curated]](https://www.curated.com/journal/351000/hiking-pioneers-bill-irwin-and-his-journey-on-the-appalachian-trail)

[2] [Blindness No Obstacle To Those With Sharp Ears [NPR]](https://www.npr.org/2011/03/13/134425825/human-echolocation-using-sound-to-see)

[3] [Rethinking disability: the social model of disability and chronic disease [PubMed Central]](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4596173/)
