# What is a Disability?
## The answer may surprise you

We hear the word <q>disability</q> a lot in modern society&mdash;disability
insurance, disability inclusion, disability pride&mdash;but do we really know
what it means?

What comes to your mind when you think of a disability? All too often, the
answer to that question ends up back at one word: <q>broken.</q> That is the
assumption that society has been built on: that people with disabilities need to
be fixed. I would like to propose an alternative way of looking at it. One where
disability is not seen as an insurmountable roadblock but rather as a beautiful
part of the diversity of our species.

But first, we still need to define what it is. The answer to that, you will
discover, is not as straightforward as it seems. Let's start with the dictionary
definition. Merriam-Webster defines disability as <q>a physical, mental,
cognitive, or developmental condition that impairs, interferes with, or limits a
person's ability to engage in certain tasks or actions or participate in typical
daily activities and interactions.</q><cite>[1]</cite>

This definition is quite broad in scope. While many people typically think of a
government-recognized disability, this definition covers far more. All of the
<q>typical</q> disabilities such as blindness, deafness, or mobility impairment
are covered, but so are a lot of conditions that are only recently coming to be
recognized for what they are: ADHD, dyslexia, arthritis, IBS, and many other
disabilities that may not be visible from the outside.

And herein lies our first main point:

### Disability does not need to be visible

Many people who have disabilities live their lives in a world that is completely
unaware of their daily struggle. These people typically are given little to no
accommodation, and are all too often blamed for their own struggles by people
who simply do not realize the extent of them.

On the opposite side of the coin are people whose disabilities are very apparent.
They may have wheelchairs, walking canes, missing limbs, or other physical signs
of their impairment. These people can find themselves looked down on or pitied
by others who may underestimate or misunderstand them.

Looking at these cases, a common thread becomes apparent. Whether a person is
mistreated for how they look or for their disability that doesn't show:

### Disability is fundamentally social

Look back at Merriam-Webster's definition of disability. A stipulation of the
term is that whatever condition it describes interferes with normal daily
tasks or activities. But who decides what is normal? Society does, of course.
Thus, depending on the society a person finds themselves in, some impairments
may not be described as disabilities at all. For further reading on this topic,
see [The Social Model](#the-social-model).

Furthermore, one of the biggest challenges faced by a person with a disability
is the overwhelming discrimination shown toward them by society. Most of the
time, this discrimination is not even intentional&mdash;much of it comes from,
and is perpetuated by, people who mean well but are unaware of what the person
with a disability needs or wants. To learn more about how you can avoid these
common patterns, see [Accidental Discrimination](#accidental-discrimination).

Lastly, I want to touch on an aspect of disability that even the most well
meaning people can easily overlook:

### Disability is not inherently bad

Imagine an aspect of who you are. Maybe the shape of your nose or the sound of
your voice. Now imagine if every single person you met told you they felt sorry
for you, that they pitied you for having to deal with having your nose, or your
voice. This is what happens to people who have disabilities.

Disability absolutely can be a bad thing, and many people view it as such.
Depending on the severity of the disability and its impact on the individual,
this is completely valid. However, many people who have disabilities have long
since come to terms with the differences between their bodies and the body of a
non-disabled person and have adapted their lifestyle accordingly. These people
are just living their lives as any other person would; differently, perhaps, but
not in an inherently degraded way.

For these people, the disability is a part of who they are. It helped to shape
their personality and it is something that they no longer view in a negative
light. It becomes neutral at worst and can even be a positive. It is not hard
to see then how society's pity becomes degrading and hurtful.

### Conclusion

At the end of the day, a disability is still defined by two key factors:
1) It is an impairment
2) It interferes with normal routines and activities

While the first part cannot be changed by the average member of society, the
second part can. Through understanding, innovation, and challenging our idea of
normal, we can turn disability into diversity. We can turn discrimination into
acceptance. We can turn something previously viewed with pity into something
beautiful.

And it doesn't take a movement. It doesn't take the whole of society radically
changing at the same time. It starts with a few brave individuals willing to make
a difference where they are.

It starts with you.

---

### Sources

[1] [Disability [Merriam-Webster]](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/disability)
